development/compiler/configuration/README.md, before:

# Compiler Configuration Overview

The compiler is called on the commandline with `npx qx
compile`. You can pass configuration values by using the
command line options (see `npx qx compile --help` for more). Usually, though, the 
compiler is fully configured using compiler hints in the source code and, most
importantly, through its configuration files.

## Compiler hints 

You can use the [`@require` and `@use` compiler
hints](class_dependencies.md) in the docblock of a class to
specify which on which other classes this class depends. For other resources such 
as images, use the [`@asset` compiler hint](../../../desktop/gui/resources.md).

## Configuration Files

The Qooxdoo tooling and package management systems rely on these configuration
files:

- [`Manifest.json`](Manifest.md): This mandatory file contains basic information
  on the library, such as name, namespace, version, dependencies, etc.
- [`compile.json`](compile.md) and [`compile.js`](api.md): These files configure
  the compiler and are responsible how the build of a project will be structured
  and what it will contain.
- [`qx-lock.json`](../cli/packages.md#lockfile-qx-lockjson): This is a library's
  lockfile which contains information on the version of the dependencies
- [`Qooxdoo.json`](../cli/packages.md#multi-library-repositories): serves as a
  registry of libraries in a package (normally not needed)

`Manifest.json`, `compile.json` and `Qooxdoo.json`are validated against
[JSON-schemas](https://github.com/qooxdoo/qooxdoo-compiler/tree/master/source/resource/qx/tool/schema)
. In contrast, `qx-lock.json` is not, and you should not code against the
lockfile's structure, since it can change any time.

You should not read or write the configuration files directly, but use the API
instead. This ensures that all the toolchain can automatically validate, and, if
necessary and possible, migrate the content automatically.

In the following, this is demonstrated using `qx.tool.config.Manifest` . The
other classes are `qx.tool.config.Compile`, `qx.tool.config.Registry` (for
`Qooxdoo.json`) and `qx.tool.config.Lockfile`.

1.  Load the model for the configuration file like so:
    `const manifestModel = await (qx.tool.config.Manifest.getInstance()).load();`
    This can be done from anywhere in the code. In non-async code, you need to
    use
    `qx.tool.config.Manifest.getInstance().load().then(manifestModel => {...});`
2.  Read properties using the `getValue()` method and manipulate the data using
    the `setValue`, `transform()` and `unset()` methods. If you change a value
    outside this API (such as an array item or a subkey of a reference), you
    must call the `validate()` method afterwards to ensure that the data is
    correct.
3.  At the end of the script, check if the model content has changed and, if
    yes, store the file's content to disk:
    `if (manifestModel.isDirty() { manifestModel.save() };`

This API is not only useful for Qooxdoo purposes. In fact, you can use it for
your own applications by extending `qx.tool.config.Abstract` to write your
[own config file models](https://github.com/qooxdoo/qooxdoo-compiler/tree/master/source/class/qx/tool/config)
.

## CLI Configuration API

While the configuration is typically read from `compile.json`, an API is exposed
by the CLI which allows the configuration to be manipulated before it is
processed and to interact with the compiler as it works.

See [api.md](api.md) for more details.

Commit message:

Add page on compiler events

development/compiler/configuration/README.md, after:

# Compiler Configuration Overview

The compiler is called on the commandline with `npx qx
compile`. You can pass configuration values by using the
command line options (see `npx qx compile --help` for more). Usually, though, the 
compiler is fully configured using compiler hints in the source code and, most
importantly, through its configuration files.

## Compiler hints 

You can use the [`@require` and `@use` compiler
hints](class_dependencies.md) in the docblock of a class to
specify which on which other classes this class depends. For other resources such 
as images, use the [`@asset` compiler hint](../../../desktop/gui/resources.md).

## Configuration Files

The Qooxdoo tooling and package management systems rely on these configuration
files:

- [`Manifest.json`](Manifest.md): This mandatory file contains basic information
  on the library, such as name, namespace, version, dependencies, etc.
- [`compile.json`](compile.md) and [`compile.js`](api.md): These files configure
  the compiler and are responsible how the build of a project will be structured
  and what it will contain.
- [`qx-lock.json`](../cli/packages.md#lockfile-qx-lockjson): This is a library's
  lockfile which contains information on the version of the dependencies
- [`Qooxdoo.json`](../cli/packages.md#multi-library-repositories): serves as a
  registry of libraries in a package (normally not needed)

`Manifest.json`, `compile.json` and `Qooxdoo.json`are validated against
[JSON-schemas](https://github.com/qooxdoo/qooxdoo-compiler/tree/master/source/resource/qx/tool/schema)
. In contrast, `qx-lock.json` is not, and you should not code against the
lockfile's structure, since it can change any time.

You should not read or write the configuration files directly, but use the API
instead. This ensures that all the toolchain can automatically validate, and, if
necessary and possible, migrate the content automatically.

In the following, this is demonstrated using `qx.tool.config.Manifest` . The
other classes are `qx.tool.config.Compile`, `qx.tool.config.Registry` (for
`Qooxdoo.json`) and `qx.tool.config.Lockfile`.

1.  Load the model for the configuration file like so:
    `const manifestModel = await (qx.tool.config.Manifest.getInstance()).load();`
    This can be done from anywhere in the code. In non-async code, you need to
    use
    `qx.tool.config.Manifest.getInstance().load().then(manifestModel => {...});`
2.  Read properties using the `getValue()` method and manipulate the data using
    the `setValue`, `transform()` and `unset()` methods. If you change a value
    outside this API (such as an array item or a subkey of a reference), you
    must call the `validate()` method afterwards to ensure that the data is
    correct.
3.  At the end of the script, check if the model content has changed and, if
    yes, store the file's content to disk:
    `if (manifestModel.isDirty() { manifestModel.save() };`

This API is not only useful for Qooxdoo purposes. In fact, you can use it for
your own applications by extending `qx.tool.config.Abstract` to write your
[own config file models](https://github.com/qooxdoo/qooxdoo-compiler/tree/master/source/class/qx/tool/config)
.

## CLI Configuration API

While the configuration is typically read from `compile.json`, an API is exposed
by the CLI which allows the configuration to be manipulated before it is
processed and to interact with the compiler as it works.

See [the configuration API](api.md) and the [compiler API](../internals/API.md) 
for more details.
